[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
We've all heard
of the old practice of putting
clove oil on a decaying tooth
to blunt the pain, but
beyond that, little
has been said of the ways in
which herbs and plants can
help heal our mouths.
Linda Straub Bruce
and Leslie Alexander
have laid out a
definitive approach
to healing our teeth, gums,
and mouth of conditions
that we have now
learned are affecting
the health of our entire bodies,
and that includes cancer.
Linda's with us today
to speak about research
in her book, "Dental Herbalism."
And wow, what a great
job you guys have done.
>>LINDA STRAUB
BRUCE: Oh, thank you.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: This should be in
everybody's-- if they have
a mouth and if they
still have teeth,
this should be in
everybody's household.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
It covers everything--
>>REGINA: You guys
did a great job.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -from A to Z.
>>REGINA: It does.
OK, so let's give us a little
bit of your own background.
First, as dental hygienist,
you have seen it all.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Some things I
hope I never have to see.
You people are courageous.
So let's get some
background in terms
of what took you
from dental hygiene
to having this incredible
passion that transitioned you
over into the understanding--
well, your relationship
with Leslie, and understanding
the use of herbs.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
Sure.
I have been a full-time
dental hygienist for 25 years,
and I have seen it all.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I've seen
patients from every age group
from age one to over 100.
I've seen all kinds of different
diseases, healthy states,
and the transitions
between them.
And the good part is, is
I've been in my same practice
for 25 years.
So there are
patients I've seen--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
You have history.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
-for 25 years, yeah.
So you can really
see the transition
in different people's lives
and how long-term things affect
the oral cavity, the teeth,
and the body as a whole.
So I've always been very
passionate and I love my job,
but where my transition
kind of came into play
with being a little
more conscious
about natural and
herbal products,
I would say goes back to my son.
That's the easy answer.
I was in my mid 30s
and I hadn't been sure
if I wanted to have children.
And I decided that I was
going to have my son.
So I kind of-- being
a project person,
I kind of looked
at it as a project
and I wanted to read
everything and learn everything
there was to know and make sure
I was really doing it right.
So I started reading about
it, and up until that point,
I had never had
a health problem.
I had never had an issue
or a disease or a syndrome.
I had always felt good
and had unlimited energy.
But I never really realized
how poor my diet truly was.
I really started
paying attention,
being cognizant that I was
building another entire human,
and I have to watch
everything that I ingest,
be it food or pharmaceuticals
or topical products that
could be absorbed
through the skin.
So I really started to look
at how I was living my life
and I couldn't believe
how bad it was.
My dietary was really bad.
I was eating a lot of
additives and different things
that I wouldn't want
to expose him to.
So I kind of was learning
and dipping my toes
in the water of food additives,
which was a huge subject.
And I started revolutionizing
and I had my first appointment,
had a check up, did
everything right, so first try
and I conceived.
So I was pregnant with
my son and I was over 35,
so I was immediately
put into high risk.
And I couldn't believe
it because I felt great.
I was invincible.
The pregnancy was going smooth.
>>REGINA: Was it arbitrary or
was it something about you?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Well,
the procedure was over 35
is considered geriatric and
it puts you into high risk.
So I had a lot of appointments,
a lot of sonograms.
I really enjoyed
seeing the baby.
Everything was great.
Well, then I came up
to the 7 and 1/2 month.
Things started changing.
I started having
high blood pressure.
a lot of issues.
I went into preterm labor.
There was no good reason why.
I was doing
everything right and I
was blessed that I had a
really knowledgeable midwife.
And initially when I started
having the high blood pressure
problems, they talked
to me about preeclampsia
and the dangers
that could happen.
And I was offered
some prescriptions
that would bring it down.
And I really read up
on the prescriptions
and I didn't want
to go that route.
The midwife that I had
was really fantastic.
She knew an herbalist.
And the herbalist was
familiar in treating patients
that had had high blood pressure
and different issues like that.
So she kind of
coordinated the treatment.
And I spoke with
her and amazingly,
right up until the very end of
my pregnancy, three herbs she
had given me-- I
was on dandelion
and I was on stinging nettle
and various herbal preparations,
safely got my blood
pressure under control right
until the very end.
So I get down to the last couple
weeks and it wasn't going well.
So the delivery came and the
delivery was very difficult.
It was not good for my son or I.
My son had a brachial
plexus injury
and I was in deep trouble.
But I didn't know that.
I had never had a baby.
I didn't know what it felt like.
I didn't know what to expect.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I had
some major problems.
I was bleeding out.
So needless to say, it
was a bad delivery, it
was a bad recovery.
I had a hard time because
I had lost so much blood
and I received six
transfusions and I was so weak.
And for the first time in
my life, I felt so bad.
And I had this new baby
and he had his problems
and I was struggling
in the night
to pick him up to nurse him.
And I just wasn't rebounding.
And I went to the
OB/GYN and they kind of
got through my
postpartum care, and you
know, eat meat and try to
do what you can, take iron.
And I kind of felt
like I was on my own.
So it became a research
project, how could I
revitalize myself and
rebuild what I had lost?
And so I really got an
appreciation for food
and the natural
benefits of food,
as well as herbal and plant
products versus pharmaceuticals
that I didn't want to take
while pregnant or nursing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: So that kind of
laid the foundation, you know?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's good.
And so, you started
off on that path.
And so you took it-- you
took it on with zeal.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure, sure.
So every day I
work with patients,
and every day I see
various different things.
And I got to thinking
after my experience
that the mouth is made
of mucous membranes.
And if you want a fast
track into the bloodstream,
it's the mucous membranes
with inhalation,
through the tissues.
A lot medications are
administered under the tongue.
So what about the
bad things that might
be a little more chemical
in the products that we use?
So I really started to look
at the oral care home products
and think what are we
exposing ourselves to?
But I'll tell you,
in 25 years, I really
had not had a lot of
continuing education courses
in natural products
or herbal remedies.
>>REGINA: No, I
wouldn't think so.
In fact, that's what
I wanted to ask now.
I mean, were you working
with a dentist that
was open to your
exploration of using
herbs and other
natural substances?
Because they're usually
pretty strict about that.
It's like no, you can give
them a little fluoride
and that's it.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right, right.
Well, we didn't really use
the herbs in the office.
But what I was noting and
seeing was a lot of our patients
were turning to the
natural products--
>>REGINA: Yes, OK.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
-and turning away
from some of the ingredients
in the home care products.
And they were starting
to have dialogue with me,
and I didn't have great answers.
And we take continuing
education every year
to keep our licenses current.
And in 25 years, I
had had one course
that talked about
various herbals
that people take
for other conditions
and how they relate to
bleeding or the anesthesia
that we may give them.
>>REGINA: That-- that reflects
the whole medical community,
though.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
>>REGINA: That's consistent.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: But there really
wasn't a lot of good resources.
>>REGINA: No.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah, so
I kind of looked into it
and I was trying to explore it.
And coincidentally,
Leslie Alexander
is a medical herbalist,
she's my co-author.
And she-- we met
through a mutual friend
that she was helping
with a skin condition.
And she came up with the idea
because even the herbalists
struggle to find good,
solid dental information.
There's a lot of
misinformation out there,
and there's not a
really good resource
that married true referenced
dental information.
>>REGINA: I was going
to ask you about that,
that herbalists don't-- that's
not an area they cover that
much as a rule.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Right.
There's a lot of
tongue diagnoses
and there's a lot of
ancient Chinese tradition
with evaluating the tongue
and the color and the zones.
But as far as
looking beyond that,
I really don't feel like
they have a good resource.
So Leslie and I teamed up,
recognizing this important need
to bring a resource to
educate the herbalists,
to kind of educate the
dental professional, too--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
-on the other end,
and then take it
across the board.
>>REGINA: For the home
consumer, absolutely.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
So we came up with a concept
of writing this publication
and it's nearly 500
pages from A to Z.
It's a great overview of
anything you could possibly
want to know.
>>REGINA: Oh, you've
done a beautiful job.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
where big pharma plays
into the story of dental care.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I
think that as far
as the pharmaceutical
industries go,
they're probably a little more
medical driven than dental
driven as far as the
typical prescriptions.
We don't write a lot of
prescriptions in our office.
Not as much as I think
you would see necessarily
in a medical office.
And an example I
would have with that
would be that if someone
came in with a tooth that
had a problem, we
would schedule them
for treatment of that tooth.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And if someone
comes into an endocrinologist
with diabetes, they may
not necessarily be able
to reschedule them for one
appointment of treatment
and send them on their way way--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -but they
have to write a prescription.
I think that the oral care and
the pharmaceutical companies
tend to more market
towards the consumer.
And sometimes to this
day, even this year, I'll
have a patient come in and
tell me about a new oral care
product on the market that
I had not heard about.
>>REGINA: Yeah
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I think that
dentistry gets more affected
possibly by the insurance
industry in what we can do,
but we're not really-- we
don't have a ton of contact
with the pharmaceutical
industry.
>>REGINA: And the
insurance industry
hasn't embraced an
herbal approach yet?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: No,
they really haven't.
Depending on where you
are in the country,
some care is more insurance
driven than other.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
Where I exist, we're
more insurance related than
other areas of the country that
are more fee for
service, so you kind of
have to make your
recommendations
and the patient makes
their decision sometimes
based on their coverage.
But there really isn't
a lot of availability
for-- even teaching
dental home care is not
a reimbursable service.
>>REGINA: I know.
We all have teeth.
We all have family-- well,
a lot of us have families,
at least we have our
own teeth, and there's
a dearth of
information out there.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
>>REGINA: I mean,
that's why I was
so happy to hear that
you had done this.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right, right.
>>REGINA: Oh, and
there's an old British--
and I wanted to relate this
back to your experience when
you were pregnant-- there's
an old wives' tale that said,
a tooth per child.
Can you talk about that?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It's
not necessarily true.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
That's why it's a wives' tale.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right, right.
>>REGINA: But talk
about the infant kind
of leaching some
of the available
nutrients from the body,
the bones and the teeth.
Is that true or untrue?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It's
pretty much a wives' tale
that the calcium is drawn
from the tooth by the baby.
But, overall, the main
message and something
that we're understanding
more and more
with every week it seems
like another study coming out
proving this, is our oral health
is related to everything else--
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
We're going there.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -that's
going on in the body.
So pregnancy is a
burden on the body.
It is a load on the
mom's nutrition.
She is building that child.
A lot of things happen
differently in the mouth
during pregnancy.
The hormone fluctuations
cause what's
called pregnancy gingivitis.
It can differ from one
woman to another widely.
Even within one woman, she
could have 10 pregnancies,
one pregnancy she barely has any
and then another pregnancy it's
severe.
It just depends on that
particular circumstance.
So what happens in
pregnancy gingivitis
is the hormone fluctuations
cause the gums to swell.
They become very
inflamed, very aggravated.
Not even necessarily
to a lot of plaque.
Even with excellent hygiene.
So some people believe,
oh, my goodness, I'm
brushing too hard because
my gums are sensitive,
they're really bleeding,
so they rollback.
They stop flossing,
they brush gently.
They brush maybe two times
a day instead of three,
or down to one.
And it actually gets it worse.
Those swollen gums trap
bacteria, they trap plaque.
That produces more acid.
Acid is what causes the decay.
So when pregnant women have
a lot of acidic environment
just because of
what's going on--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -or the
high levels of bacteria,
they tend to get more decay.
The old wives' tale is that
it was calcium leached out,
but actually it
kind of translates
to more acid exposure.
>>REGINA: OK, thank you
for clarifying that for us.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
>>REGINA: We got that wives'
tale checked off the list.
So the question I
was going to ask you,
is it endemic to the aging
process that we go away
from this life toothless?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: No.
No.
And you're seeing that
more and more that people--
it was statistically
relevant in this century
that one in four people
over 65 were toothless.
That number is going to be
going down and lower and lower.
We are doing more prevention.
We are more aware of disease.
Science is teaching us so much.
There are more treatment
options available.
People are appreciating
their teeth more,
understanding, more
health conscious.
Making better food choices.
>>REGINA: And maybe not so
willing to just give them
all up, I mean,
like my mother did.
I think-- she had very-- her
teeth were prone to decay.
By the time she was 36, she told
the dentist, who suggested it
I guess, oh, just pull them all.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Right.
>>REGINA: And so we're
not doing that anymore--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
>>REGINA: -in that way.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: When you
think that it's inevitable
that you're going
to lose your teeth,
you kind of feel
like why bother.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Let's
just get there now.
But it's not inevitable.
Sometimes if teeth
are lost, it's
usually because
of patient option
or because they've waited
until it was too late.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah.
The most common reason
for us to pull a tooth
is because bone loss
has got so severe.
And the way that we
like to say that is
if you think of your
tooth as a house,
you can't build a house
on a sandy foundation.
You need a solid foundation
for your home to-- you
can have a great home, but
if the foundation is bad,
it's not going to work.
So the periodontium,
the gums, the ligaments
that hold the teeth
to the bone, the bone,
need to be healthy
to keep our teeth.
Usually if a tooth
breaks or gets decay,
there's almost always
a restorative option
to save a tooth.
But once we lose
our bone, it's gone.
We can't get that back.
So if we can understand
and appreciate gum disease
and prevent it and treat
it in the early stages,
there is no reason why teeth
can't be kept for a lifetime.
>>REGINA: That's good to know.
And I remember being impressed,
I was reading one of the books
from the Weston
Price Foundation,
I think it was Sal-- an
interview with Sal-- or Sally
Fallon that had written it.
And it showed those images
from back when of people in,
I think it was the Amazon.
He had traveled the world
and the indigenous people
who had not been
exposed to refined foods
had these beautiful,
beautiful teeth at all ages.
And you say that there's a more
definitive study from roughly
that area, even earlier
from Willoughby Miller,
can you talk about what
was understood then even-
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: -and then we'll
start moving forward.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
Weston Price found that the
diets of these people that he
was studying is
nothing like our diet.
Our diet is laden with
artificial ingredients
and preservatives and high
fructose corn syrup everywhere.
We really have to think
about our food choices.
And those indigenous populations
were living on raw vegetables
and not consuming--
>>REGINA: And herbs.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Herbs, nuts, berries.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
Yep, they were-- the raw foods
would clean the teeth by nature
just because they
were crunchy, and they
didn't have the fermentable
carbohydrates and the sugars
that we consume.
In addition to that,
they would use herbs.
Herbs in their drink.
Herbs as part of their culinary
diet, and herbs as therapy
that have antiseptic and
anti-inflammatory and
acid-reducing properties.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: So they didn't
have the diet that we have,
so they didn't get the decay.
>>REGINA: And it's as though the
mouth was formed beautifully.
You didn't see-- well, at
least in the-- we don't
know the truth of it, but at
least in the illustrations
he brought back, you didn't
see crowding of teeth.
You didn't see undersized
jaws and the like.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Right.
It's more of a natural
lifestyle and it's
more of an evidence of that.
And Willoughby Miller brought
up some great information
with his studies.
He was a dentist, and
there was a whole explosion
of information in the 1800s.
And the theory that he kind
of with the other people that
were doing research termed
was called the focal infection
theory, or the theory
of focal infection.
That is the old version
of the retooled, renamed,
redesigned oral systemic
connection we have today.
They didn't have the science
to back it up back then,
but they had it right.
Bacteria plus sugar equals
acid that causes decay.
It was the theory that
Willoughby Miller hypothesized.
He also hypothesized that
there were infections,
or focal infections in
the mouth existing that
carried bacteria
that were harmful.
And since the mouth is a
portal to the digestive tract,
the respiratory tract,
and the blood circulating
through all parts
of our body, what
these infectious
microorganisms could do
would travel to other part of
the body and cause problems.
Exacerbate other
systemic disease.
Cause other focus of infection.
And he couldn't prove that
because it wasn't until later
that C Edmund Kells
brought x-ray technology
into the United
States and proved
what Willoughby Miller
had hypothesized.
That on an x-ray
there are abscess,
there are infections full
of virulent microorganisms,
and the mouth is connected
to the rest of the body.
There is a relationship
between oral disease
and the rest of the
body and other diseases,
especially
inflammatory diseases.
>>REGINA: Yes, well
speaking of inflammatory,
let's talk about gingivitis.
Let's talk about gum disease
because unless someone
is brushing their teeth
and they're pouring blood
or have horrible
pain of some kind,
most people have no idea
that this is taking place.
Can you talk about
that for a bit?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: We
see that every day.
And for 25 years I almost can't
believe it hasn't changed.
If I washed my hair and my scalp
bled when I washed my hair,
I would worry.
Gums are not meant to bleed
when they're cleaned or flossed
or brushed.
But somehow it becomes accepted
that they bleed when I floss.
Or I often hear,
I don't floss them
because that makes them bleed.
Healthy gum tissue
does not bleed
when you brush, when
you floss, when you eat,
when your dental professional
does an exam on you.
They aren't supposed to bleed.
Gingivitis is a sign,
it's a warning sign,
it's a beacon that
something's going on.
>>REGINA: Can you see it?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
Sometimes you can.
Sometimes you can see
redness in the tissue.
inflammation in the tissue.
And that's the
thing that there's
such a spectrum on how gum
disease manifests and visually
shows up that you can't always
rely on just what you see.
But what the gums
should have is,
if you looked at a close
up picture of gum tissue,
it should have an
orange peel effect.
That's called stippling.
That shows that there's
no inflammation.
Those are the little
connective tissue rods,
the fibers that hold the
gum tissue to the bone.
If there's no inflammation,
that beautiful orange peel look
is on the gums.
They should be coral pink.
Some different ethnic groups
do have brown or gray spots.
That doesn't necessarily
mean a problem.
But the key to the
first step of gum
disease, gingivitis,
is that there's
bleeding and inflammation.
>>REGINA: OK, so when
you go to the dentist
for your little checkup, so you
use that little torture device
there that you have, and they
go and they examine your pockets
and so forth.
And maybe you can show us
a little bit about that
and what is a normal-- is any
depth of pocket normal to where
you're in pretty bad
shape and you need to go
and you need to have some
periodontal work done?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure, sure.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It's hard when
we go to the office because we
can't see what the dental
professional is doing--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -and I have
a wonderful intraoral camera,
but I can't run it and do a
dental exam at the same time.
>>REGINA: And we're in--
a lot of times in fear.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah, right.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
And sometimes
you're just thinking
about other things,
not what's going on.
So what I brought with us today
is I brought a little tooth
model to kind of demonstrate
what we have going on.
This is called a probe, and this
takes millimeter measurements
under the gum.
The one I use in practice
has 10 little stripes on it.
It's a metal instrument.
This one just kind of
makes it a little easier
to kind of delineate
where we're talking here.
The green area is 3
millimeters and below.
The middle red band
is five millimeters.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
The thick red band
is seven to 10 millimeters.
>>REGINA: Wow,
that's deep though.
That's really deep.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
So what we do when we check
the gum tissue for health,
we take the
millimeter measurement
and we take six measurements
around each tooth.
Three on the outside,
one, two, three.
And three on the
inside, same thing.
>>REGINA: So that's when
they're calling out the numbers?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Correct.
Correct.
And what you ideally
want in most situations
is three and below.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: You can have a
healthy four-millimeter pocket,
and you can also have an
inflamed two-millimeter pocket.
So it's not only
the pocket depth.
We're also looking for any signs
of infection or inflammation.
So when we measure three
millimeters below the tissue
or less, there's
no inflammation,
there's no bleeding, we
consider that healthy gums.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: When we
measure three millimeters
and above and there is
no bone loss that we
see on x-rays,
typically if there's
bleeding or inflammation,
we consider that gingivitis.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
The big transition
is gingivitis is reversible.
We can take our tissues and
get that irritating plaque,
bacteria, use anti-inflammatory,
herbal mouth rinses,
take good care, have good diet,
and reverse that and go exactly
back to health right
where we started.
>>REGINA: So people's mouths
can repair themselves?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: They
can, definitely.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Because a lot of times
people hear this news
and they're frightened
and think, oh my god,
what's that going to
cost, you know, this time?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
Exactly.
Right, right.
Well, if gingivitis
is allowed to progress
to the next phase, what happens
is we get a little deeper.
The gums form a turtleneck
around the tooth
and they're attached
at the base.
So that inflammation
gets higher,
which leads to a deeper pocket.
Plus it may start affecting
the attachment where
that gum attaches to the tooth
and start pushing it down.
The tartar starts to
build up under the gum.
The bacteria that lives
under the gum is anaerobic.
It hates oxygen.
They are the bad bugs.
We never want a sterile
mouth because the good bugs
above the gum line keep
other things at bay
and help with digestion.
But under the gum, you can
get some pretty bad bacteria
that can start living in the
tartar and bacterial-laden
plaque that gets under the gum.
So what happens is,
as it progresses,
once it transitions
to the bone, that's
where we call it periodontitis.
Once bone dissolves
and bone is lost--
>>REGINA: And the bacteria
is dissolving the bone?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: The
byproducts from the bacteria.
Yep.
And so we get into a
vicious cycle that,
say you have a area of gum
disease here and you have
a five-millimeter pocket,
you cannot brush or floss--
>>REGINA: No, there's
nothing you can do there.
>>STRAUB BRUCE: five
millemeters below the tissue.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: So
it's a vicious cycle.
The buildup-- the plaque
calcifies and gets
hard and stuck on the tooth
and that's called tarter.
And it irritates
the gum, it acts
like a sliver in your skin.
Your skin would swell and
irritate and pull away
from that irritation.
So it's a progressive disease.
And if we were to peel away the
gum tissue to look at the bone,
the bone would
recede down and we
would have deposits of
tarter on the teeth--
>>REGINA: All under there.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -that
is full of bacteria.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And eventually
when you lose enough bone,
the teeth become mobile and
that's where we're in trouble.
But the amazing part
is that typically it's
a painless process.
Bone doesn't have nerve endings.
It's not going to throb
and hurt and let you know.
The gums don't have the
same type of nerve response
as if you cut your finger.
So until it's in the
very severe stages,
it's typically painless.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
So that's why it's
important to have a
dental professional.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's say it
gets pretty bad like that, what
are some of the best
dental techniques
available that can be used,
like planing and so forth?
What happens once you hit
like a six level pocket
and you have all this
build up underneath--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
>>REGINA: -and you're trying
to recover your mouth.
What do you do?
This is before we get into
any of the herbs, by the way.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right, right.
So what you would
come in is you would
come into the dental
office for what's
called a deep cleaning
and scaling ideally.
We try to avoid all surgical
procedures if possible.
The best thing to do is to
go do the deep cleaning,
get all the buildup out
from underneath the gums,
to make sure that there's
smooth root surfaces
and that's called root
planing, and make sure
that we're taking out that
bacterial irritant that's
causing that problem like
that sliver under the gum.
>>REGINA: And I know
sometimes don't they
put antibiotics in there then?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Well, how do
you feel about that?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
It's interesting.
I typically have
used, for years,
a chlorhexidine gluconate
flush under the gum
to fight the bacteria.
But there's a new product
that I was introduced
to by Dr. Michael Kolodychak,
he's an oral surgeon,
and he uses the product
for wound healing
after extractions.
It's an all-natural
product called Socket
and I'm implementing it
now into dental practice.
And this has been some of the
limitations to implementing
natural and herbal
products is that we are,
by the standard of care, bound
to identifying the products
that we use.
I can't, as a
dental professional,
go out to a field and
wild craft an herb
and bring it in and
use it on a patient.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's what I was
referring to earlier
in the conversation, yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Right.
But we're getting there.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: The
pharmaceutical companies,
the oral care companies,
they're doing great research.
It's coming out all
the time right now,
that's really exciting.
So this Socket uses oil of
clove and cinnamon and aloe,
and it is an approved product.
It's a wound healing product.
>>REGINA: Oh, wonderful.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And it's
all-natural, completely safe
if swallowed.
And what I'll do is
I'll administer it
under the gum instead of a
more chemical pharmaceutical.
>>REGINA: And is it
equally as effective
as those little
antibiotic things?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It is.
It is.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: The
science is amazing.
You do not have to worry
about using something
like an antibiotic chip or
an antibiotic fiber or gel
and risk bacterial
drug-resistance.
It is all-natural, it's
safe, and it works.
So we're excited.
>>REGINA: That's fabulous.
So we have to write that down.
It's called Socket.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: OK.
And now, is that only available
in that kind of situation
through the
professional industry?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It
is as far as I know.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: But
it's getting picked up
by more and more vendors.
And what you do is you get a
syringe of this viscous gel
and you apply it during the
procedure to, number one, act
as a volinary or
healing product.
It's an antiseptic.
It's an anti-inflammatory.
It has analgesic effects to it.
>>REGINA: The clove oil.
Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And
you give the patient
the remainder of the syringe
to take home and safely
use at home.
>>REGINA: Oh, that's fabulous.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And I'm
hoping that products like this
are going to get a
little more mainstream.
They're safe.
They're easy.
And the science
proves they work.
>>REGINA: Good news.
OK, what about when
you're doing root planing,
there are different options.
How do you feel about laser?
Using the laser
for root planing?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
Well, in my state,
you know, unfortunately,
in the United
States as dental professionals,
we're all on different islands.
In my state, I'm not
permitted to use a laser,
so typically I don't use--
we don't use little--
I do the gum disease
treatments in the office.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And we
don't use a laser with them.
There are--
>>REGINA: Is there any
preference of laser
over regular tools, or?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Well, as far
as the surgical procedures,
you definitely want to
aim towards the laser
because the wound healing
is so much better.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: You want
to try to catch the gum
disease before it really
needs surgical reduction.
If it does, the
laser's the way to go.
The laser can also
sterilize pockets
and reduce bacterial levels.
It is a less traumatic
way to reduce pockets
if we're to that point.
>>REGINA: OK, OK.
I just had to put that in there.
Now, each time you're
saying something,
it's triggering another
thought or remembrance.
One thing I've heard
is that if people
use traditional mouthwashes that
have a lot of chemicals in them
that one of the
downsides of that
is that it can kill all
that lovely good bacteria
in the mouth.
Is that true?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yes,
there is truth to that.
Long term use of particular
antibiotic mouth rinses
will change the normal
flora in your mouth.
It can lead you to-- whenever
there's a bacterial disruption,
you could have
different things happen.
Thrush is the most common.
If the good bacteria doesn't
keep the fungus in check,
then you can get thrush.
And thrush can be, although
it's not dangerous to--
>>REGINA: Very painful.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
-life, it's miserable.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I know people who've had that.
It's horrible.
They can't eat.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
Infants can get thrush
because their mother was
on a course of antibiotics
and was breastfeeding them,
and they're still building up
that normal bacterial flora.
But the other thing
to keep in mind
when you're talking
about any home
care products--
commercial home care
products is looking
at the ingredient.
We've become, finally,
accustomed to really reading
food labels.
We need to look at oral
care products, cosmetics,
different labels as well.
Because the mucous
membranes in the mouth
can uptake what's
in those products.
And if we look at
some of the products,
we have a lot of
artificial colors.
We have a lot of
artificial sweeteners.
The artificial blues
are of a concern
and being looked at right now.
But the big one I tend
to see the problem with
is SLS, sodium lauryl sulfate.
It's a surfactant.
It's an industrial
detergent agent.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And back in
the day, before our time,
everybody used tooth powder
and it didn't foam up.
But SLS got added to toothpaste
to give that foaming action,
and it's in a lot of
shampoos to really foam.
So foam equates
psychologically with clean.
But it actually doesn't
do anything to help,
and studies are
proving that it's
increasing tooth sensitivity.
And it's also being
implicated in aphthous ulcers,
or commonly called canker sores.
So SLS, there's no good reason
to really have to have that,
and it's a good one to avoid.
There's a controversy
going on right now
on a product that's found
in a lot of deodorants
and health care products,
primarily oral care products,
called triclosan.
Some people call it triclosan.
And it was just
banned in Minnesota
as of 2017, I believe it is,
it has to be out of the soaps.
>>REGINA: OK, so what is
its effect in the mouth?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It is
an antimicrobial agent.
And what they're
finding is, yes, it
is an antimicrobial agent; but
in reference to your question,
it's suspected in causing
drug-resistant bacteria
and altering the normal flora
of the mouth over long-term use.
But on top of that, we're
seeing an environmental impact,
that it does not degrade so
it goes into the water system
and it's killing off algae that
are involved in photosynthesis
for the--
>>REGINA: So--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -planet.
>>REGINA: -off the list.
Avoid that.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Right.
So--
>>REGINA: That's
excellent information.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -it
can really change
the good bacteria
that's in your mouth.
It can morph them
into being something
that they weren't meant to be,
and it can alter their balance.
>>REGINA: OK, so now let's
go into the herbal part
for a little while--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
>>REGINA: -and talk
about what you would
consider to be maybe one of
the best types of toothpaste
if you have a relatively
normal and healthy mouth.
The ones that are
available as pastes already
versus maybe making your
own paste or powder.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Well,
I've tried both.
I've tried a homemade paste
with all different kinds
of crazy ingredients.
And I've tried more
naturally marketed,
available toothpaste
that weren't
the typical in the
toothpaste aisle.
And it's kind of exciting.
And I guess it depends on
your personal preference
and what works for you.
If someone is interested in
making their own toothpaste,
the amount of options
are unlimited.
It's like a full
cocktail that you
can make with a little bit of
this and a little bit that.
And we go into great
detail of that in the book.
>>REGINA: Yes, you do.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: We
picked 41 safe--
we aimed for the safest herbs
that anyone could use and are
safest, most readily available--
>>REGINA: So give
us an idea of--
>>STRAUB BRUCE: like culinary.
>>REGINA: -what they are
and the form they're in
and how they would
be administered.
I mean, because
sometimes if you're
thinking in terms of an
essential oil, you know,
it's like, ow, ow, ow, you know.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
You have to be careful.
>>REGINA: That stuff burns.
Yeah, exactly.
So what--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: One of
the favorite ones is sage.
Sage is great because
you can make a tea.
You could cool the tea
and add other elements
and make it an
excellent mouth rinse.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: You could
add salt scrub to it.
You can take a variety
of other herbs.
Each herb has a property or
a multiple list of properties
that it has to it based
on its compounds that
are part of that herb,
the effective compounds.
So in the book we identify--
say, we take sage.
And sage may be antimicrobial,
anti-inflammatory.
And you could have clove, which
is an analgesic or a volinary
or healing herb.
So say that's what your
situation is right now.
You just had some
dental treatment,
you have some infection,
you have some inflammation.
You could take a
nice sage tea, you
can cool it into--
make it a mouth rinse.
You could add a
little baking soda
as a neutralizing agent,
spraying a little clove in.
You could add a drop or two of
essential oil, very diluted,
and kind of make
your own cocktail
and find out what
tastes good for you
and what fits your
particular circumstance.
But also, sage leaves have
been used as a natural tooth
cleaner.
You can rub them
right on the teeth
and you can whiten
your teeth with it,
and it's a great
breath freshener.
>>REGINA:And they're
a little bit furry,
so it creates a little
bit of friction.
What about the notion, and
you just brought it up,
I was going to ask about
it, of baking soda?
And there are some
little, you know,
that you squeeze out of little
bottles that are commercially
available, as well just sticking
it in the Arm & Hammer box.
How does that do
as a toothpaste?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: As a
toothpaste, it's a great base.
It's an acid neutralizer.
The big thing is is, especially
with the American diet,
we have a high acid environment.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And so
it's an alkaline agent,
so it brings us
closer to a neutral pH
where our mouth wants to be,
where our saliva is happy.
So baking soda is great.
Although it's a crystalline
structure and it feels gritty,
a lot of people translate
that it's too abrasive.
It really isn't.
The abrasive tests on it
show that it crumbles easily.
It's easily dissolved.
>>REGINA: It dissolves easily.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
>>REGINA: And your teeth
feel so good afterwards.
Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah.
I'm a big fan of baking soda,
natural unprocessed sea salts
as a scrub mixed with
like an herbal tea,
or possibly even an
herbal oil infusion.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: And
those are great.
>>REGINA: What are some of
the best essential oils?
I know you talked about
clove a little while ago,
but what are some
other really good ones?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
Peppermint, wintergreen.
>>REGINA: Oh, I love those.
All of those.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Cinammon.
And the thing is, it's
funny because if you
look at oral care products,
these herbal products have been
ingredients in commercial
oral care products for years.
We don't necessarily
recognize them.
Thymol is the basis
for Listerine.
Most Listerine
products have thymol.
It always has since
it was invented
as a surgical antiseptic.
And thymol is an element, a
chemical compound of thyme,
the herb thyme.
So it's not like it's new.
We readily use Eugenol
in the dental office.
Eugenol is a compound pulled
from clove and different
other natural products.
We're using them, but
we're calling them
something different,
so sometimes we
don't recognize that they
are tried and true that we
use across the board.
>>REGINA: And sometimes you
see these wonderful, exotic,
natural concoctions that
are ayurvedic, for example.
And they have usually quite a
wide variety of herbs in them
and they're often a kind
of a brownish or beige kind
of paste.
Do you find a lot of those
to be really beneficial?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: They are.
They're amazing.
And the good thing
about the book
is we have a big
chart so you can take,
am I looking for something
antimicrobial right now?
Do I have a child
teething that's unhappy?
You could make a chamomile
tea and soak a washcloth in it
and freeze it, and have the
baby suck on the washcloth.
There are the popsicles.
You can do popsicles
because it's cooling.
It's unlimited
possibilities, and it's
getting more mainstream.
And that's exciting for me
because it brings more science
to back up--
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
-what we're saying.
It brings more data.
It brings more familiarity.
It makes it more open to
a wider range of people.
There's an exciting
toothpaste from a dentist
in New Orleans that isolated
an element in chocolate that
is antibacterial.
>>REGINA: Oh, people will like--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -the toothpaste.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -hearing that.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah,
but the toothpaste
supposedly doesn't
taste like chocolate.
But it--
>>REGINA: Doesn't mean eat
a Hershey's bar necessarily
before it.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
Right, right.
But one that I'm in
love with right now,
I've been trying
Jason toothpaste
and various different
natural toothpastes
that you can purchase.
The one I love right now
and I keep going back to it
is TheraNeem Toothpaste
by Organix South.
And neem is--
>>REGINA: Neem, yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -a fantastic
product for the mouth.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It is amazing.
And they have a
tooth powder, and I
consider myself to be
a pretty good brusher,
but my teeth have never felt so
clean when I brush with that.
>>REGINA: Oh, what's the
name of that product?
Is that Jason?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
That's Organix South--
>>REGINA: Organix South--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
-TheraNeem Tooth Powder.
>>REGINA: -TheraNeem
Tooth Powder.
OK, good.
So give everyone a chance
to write that down.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right, right.
>>REGINA: How-- where do
you get that, by the way?
I want to try it.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I
got it mail order.
I mail order it direct.
I think it's readily
on the Amazon.
I think you can go right
to their website with that.
They have a variety of
products, Neem Mouth
Rinse, Neem-saturated floss,
but I am a good brusher.
>>REGINA: I've got a star on it.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah.
Yeah.
I love it.
I keep trying other ones,
but I love that one.
That one's my favorite.
>>REGINA: OK, so that gives
us a little bit of knowledge
we can take home and do
something about right away.
Let's talk about--
I have a few ways
I want to go before
we come to our close.
One of them is--
let's talk about,
because that's your specialty--
the systemic connection
between your mouth and
the rest of your body.
Some of the diseases people
would be surprised to see.
I mean, you have diabetes--
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Definitely.
>>REGINA: -cancer.
All kinds of diseases
that are related in there.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Diabetes is the tried and true.
We've known for 50
years plus that diabetes
has a direct relationship
with gum disease.
There's newer links coming
out it seems all the time.
Science is in an explosion.
It's really an exciting time.
The mouth is a
portal to the body.
If there is chronic
inflammation--
chronic periodontal disease
is the most common type
of gum disease.
>>REGINA: Mm-hm.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It
is the one you're
going to see all the time.
There's nine different
categories of gum disease,
but that's the
everyday one we have.
It's a chronic
inflammatory disease.
And what it does is, when
it's going on in your mouth,
it causes your body to release
inflammatory mediators.
Things like C-reactive
proteins and cytokines
that circulate
through your blood.
In addition, when you have
an irritated inner lining
of that gum tissue and this
virulent, bad bacteria sitting
right next to it, it will
enter the bloodstream.
It will travel through
ulcerated tissue.
Plus, the inflammatory
mediators right there
at that infected gum
tissue will travel straight
through the bloodstream.
So what's going on in your
mouth is not a separate entity
like we kind of have treated it
being-- going to your dentist
and they do this.
You know, it's all
related together.
Gum disease is tried and
true related with diabetes.
It's a two-way street.
Diabetes makes gum disease worse
and makes you more prone to it,
and vice versa.
When your gum
disease is present,
you're going to have a harder
time getting glycemic control.
There's new studies out
looking at new links
between gum disease
and pancreatic cancer.
Alzheimer's.
There was a really compelling
study that came out;
it was a very small
study so we're
waiting for more
information before we really
declare a causative
relationship,
but there's definitely
an association,
or what we would
call a risk factor.
They took brain tissue of
10 Alzheimer's patients.
And they found the virulent
bacteria, P gingivalis,
F nucleatum, all the bad
bugs in the brain tissue
of four of the 10
Alzheimer's patients.
Now, what was
Earth-shattering about that
is these bacteria
were not believed
to be able to cross the
blood-brain barrier.
There's only one
bacteria, Spirochete,
known to be able to cross
the blood-brain barrier.
So the question became did
the bacteria morph and cross
the blood-brain barrier, or
did the blood-brain barrier
drop down?
>>REGINA: And were those
particular bacteria
implicated in the effects
of Alzheimer's as well?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: They don't know.
They're still looking at it.
But in the brains of patients
without Alzheimer's, they
did not find any
of these bacteria.
It is suspected, which they're
working right now to prove,
that the inflammatory
mediators that
are circulating
through the blood
makes the blood-brain
barrier more permeable, more
penetrable.
It drops our defenses.
It is a constant systemic load
on our immune system bringing
our immunity down.
So our immunity is busy over
here fighting our chronic perio
disease, how can it
go over here and fight
too many other battles
at the same time?
And another interesting one
is rheumatoid arthritis.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: If
you look at the blood
profile of a patient with
chronic periodontal disease
and a patient with
rheumatoid arthritis,
and they only have one,
they look identical.
They are chronic,
they are inflammatory.
If you have both, they're
going to make each other worse.
>>REGINA: OK, so
let's talk about some
of the foods that are
aggravating that chronically
inflamed condition in
any tissues of the body.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I would say
that acidic foods, sugary foods,
anything that promotes
bacterial growth.
Whenever you feed
these bacteria,
they're going to be happy.
They're going to overgrow.
So there are so many
factors in tooth decay.
There are many factors
in gum disease.
Food and nutrition
is so important.
If you have good
B vitamin intake,
you have good C vitamin,
your oral tissues
are going to be healthier.
They're going to be
able to fight off
inflammation a lot better.
Diet is so important.
The additives that
we're using are not
meant to be in our bodies.
They can inflame tissue, they
can add to systemic disease,
and they can
aggravate conditions
that we may already have.
>>REGINA: OK, now
let's hop it along.
So maybe we didn't
do such a great job,
so we've had gingivitis and
now it's impacted our bone.
And now we've
started losing teeth.
And so what happens with the
loss of a tooth in the mouth?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
If you think of it
like a jigsaw puzzle
together, or if we go back
to the foundation of a house
and you pull one block out,
it's a problem.
If you lose one tooth
and it's not replaced,
the other teeth will
start tilting in.
The tooth above that or below
it that has the opposition bite
will start continuing to
come out of the gum line.
Teeth don't have a set
eruption rate where they stop.
They stop when they
hit something else.
If it has nothing to
hit, it'll continue
to erupt until it
hits something,
and usually that'll be the gums.
And that'll be really bad.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
So it's important
that once we get into
those malalignments,
if we lose a tooth, that we
replace it as soon as possible
and keep those malalignments
from happening.
It'll trap more bacteria.
It will trap more food.
It can cause headaches.
It can cause TMJ dysfunction
of the jaw joint.
It can cause a lot of
issues with the bite.
It can cause trauma
to other teeth.
When we walk, we
use the whole foot.
It's important to spread
all of our chewing
across the entire mouth.
>>REGINA: OK.
OK, so I'm going to ask you
something kind of personal now.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
>>REGINA: There was something
going on with my teeth.
It was just kind
of wacky and it was
impacting the bone
and everything.
And finally this one brilliant,
old-fashioned dentist,
who loves bites, he just
loves adjusting bites, said,
you have the screwiest
looking bite.
And because my teeth
have always been straight
and I've never have any kind of
orthodontic work or anything,
I wouldn't have suspected that.
But, in fact, for
whatever reason,
they'd started moving around
a little bit in the very back.
So he suggested that I
try Invisaligns and bring
those teeth into
the proper alignment
again, because he was talking
about this misalignment
creating pressures and stresses
on the bite that actually
will start working
against the bone itself.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
disintegrating the bone.
Can you talk about
bite a little bit?
And then I'll go on
to something else.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Sure.
Sure.
When you have a
traumatic bite, something
has to take the impact.
If-- teeth are dynamic.
They don't erupt and when
we're 18 that's where they are
and that's where they stay.
>>REGINA: They're moving
around a bit, yeah.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
Our bone is constantly
dissolving and regenerating.
And the teeth are held
into the bone by ligaments,
so they do move over time,
and they will shift over time.
And sometimes that
shift is very gradual,
but will evolve into
a traumatic bite.
If you have two teeth that
are hitting together too hard,
something is going
to take the impact.
That is going to
come down to the bone
and the ligament of the tooth.
That can cause a
traumatic bone injury.
So that can cause
the bone to dissolve.
And additionally,
it can also affect
the root structure of the tooth.
It can cause something that
we call root resorption,
causing it to dissolve
due to trauma.
And in severe cases, it
can cause the actual nerve
within the tooth to
die due to trauma.
>>REGINA: You know,
it's interesting
because most people would-- I
had no idea my bite was off.
It wasn't anything
really odd or noticeable.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
>>REGINA: So how would a person
know that the problems they're
having in their mouth
might be due to having
a bite that's gone off?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right, right.
If your teeth are
straight, you may not
realize it because it's
how they lock together.
They were meant to have pits and
fissures and peaks and valleys
that mesh together
perfectly to chew our food.
That's not something that you
can easily bite down and see.
So some of the
clues you may see is
that you may have
clicking or popping
in the jaw joint by the ear.
You may have limited
opening, pain on opening.
You may be having
persistent headaches
and it may progress
through to the neck.
But ultimately, if you
take a bite paper--
if you go to the dental office
and they take a bite paper,
they can identify areas
that are hitting hard
that weren't meant
to hit together.
And those areas you
definitely want to correct.
Sometimes you can feel a
manifestation in the bone.
It'll feel like a bruise.
You can say that this tooth
hurts when I chew food
and I think it's this
one, but maybe that one.
And it doesn't identify
to an individual tooth.
It's kind of diffuse and
wanders because it's the bone,
and the bone doesn't have
those particular nerve
fibers in them.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: But a good
dental exam can identify those,
and that's definitely something
that you want to correct.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's
important because it
could cause the
loss of the tooth.
And I followed his
advice, and I thought,
OK, it's a little late in life
to do Invisaligns, you know.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Never.
>>REGINA: But anyway, I decided
to do-- I just do it at night.
But six months or a year
later, he looks at it and says,
my god.
The bone is where-- is growing
back where it needs to be.
The teeth are really
good and solid
and moving right
toward where they
need to be and just a
tiny little adjustment,
buff it out at the end of that.
And then just stay with
sleeping with those
at night throughout,
if you want,
the rest of your lifetime.
It keeps all of your
teeth exactly where they
need to be to avoid
all this trauma
and movement that happens
throughout a lifetime.
So you're a big fan of that?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: I did
Invisalign when I was 41.
>>REGINA: Oh, you did?
OK.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah.
I had-- my front teeth decided
out of the blue to bail ship
and decided to drift
all of a sudden,
and I knew what was going on.
And I felt a traumatic
bite developing.
And we did Invisalign
of me in my office.
I am a big fan of Invisalign.
Traditional braces are
great, but the Invisalign
has the advantage that you
don't have them affixed
to the teeth to
trap those bacteria.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It's
less of a risk of decay
because you can
effectively clean,
you can take them out to eat.
So it's not an
option for everyone,
but it's a great option.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Well, I'm happy
you brought it up.
OK, so we only have
a few minutes left
and we have to get onto
one of controversial issues
and that is the use of fluoride.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yes.
>>REGINA: You know, even though
I've done shows on fluoride
and what it does systemically
and what it's also
suspected to do, and kind
of the nature of what it is.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Right.
>>REGINA: And I've talked
to other people who
have said, you know,
if it's used topically,
it can also stop
the decay process.
What's the truth about fluoride?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: There's
a ton of misinformation--
>>REGINA: Yes, there is.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -about fluoride.
We could do a
whole show on this.
The big misconceptions
is you have
to look at fluoride in two ways.
There's systemic fluoride
that would be taken as a pill,
like a supplement,
or in the water,
or in a fluoridated salt.
And then there's
topical fluoride--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: -that can
help remineralize enamel.
On the systemic
fluoride, it is proven
that enamel that was formed
during fluoride administration
is more resistant to decay.
But the controversy comes
in, and rightfully so,
that if you're fluoridating
an entire population,
you're not giving them a choice.
And so, oftentimes
on the internet,
you read that this
country or that country
doesn't fluoridate their water
and their decay levels are low.
But we have to look at all the
factors in the big picture.
Some of them opt
for fluoridated salt
so the consumer has the
choice instead of fluoridating
the entire population
in the municipal water,
you can choose to
buy fluoridated salt
or non-fluoridated salt.
In some of the
European countries,
the dental care for children is
part of what happens in school.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE:
Unfortunately, in the US,
we're dropping the
ball on the kids.
>>REGINA: Big time.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: It's big time.
It shouldn't be.
And so, the kids are all taken
care of in a different way.
So we have to kind of
look at all the factors,
but I do respect that
it should be an option.
But when we look at topical
fluoride, it's important.
And what we practice
in our practice
is a caries risk assessment.
If someone is an adult patient
with dry mouth undergoing head
and neck radiation therapy
with the saliva that
helps fight decay
next to non-existent,
they are a high-risk
person that could benefit
from an application
of fluoride varnish.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: But say you
have a 40-year-old that comes in
and has never had a filling,
never had decay, strong enamel,
great diet.
Do you necessarily need
to apply fluoride there?
I think it needs to
be risk assessed.
>>REGINA: Dependent.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Yeah.
And it is a personal choice.
>>REGINA: We have only a minute
left, just a few seconds.
Any final thoughts that
we haven't gotten to yet?
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: No, the main
message that we have is it
was really important for
us to write this piece
and there's nothing
else like that.
And the more
natural and educated
we are about our choices, I
think the better off we are
and it's good to know
what our options are.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Thank you so much, Linda.
And you have a beautiful
smile, beautiful teeth.
>>STRAUB-BRUCE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Good
example for your book.
Again, the book is called
"Dental Herbalism,"
which is a must-have
guide for caring
for your mouth and
your immune system.
You can find it at
any major bookseller.
And if you enjoyed
this interview,
you might also
enjoy the connection
between fibromyalgia
and dental care
in an archived interview I
did with Alison Adams out
of England.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]